5.10.0 release blog post (#154)
minetest/blog: _posts/2024-11-10-5.10.0-released.md

---
layout: post
title: "Luanti 5.10.0 released!"
author: luatic, grorp, GreenXenith
description: >-
  Luanti 5.10.0 has been released with 
image: /static/blog/5.10.0/cover.webp
image_credit: Gefüllte Taubenbrust
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?p=440491
tags:
  - release
---

<h2 class="sr-only">Introduction</h2>

> Luanti ([formerly Minetest](https://blog.minetest.net/2024/10/13/Introducing-Our-New-Name/)) 5.10.0 has been released

Reviewer: Links in the excerpt break the homepage card (www.luanti.org) currently. Can get around this by providing an `excerpt` in the front matter without the link and removing `<!-- more -->`

Reviewer: The embed is https://blog.minetest.net/embed_latest/ if you want to test locally

Author: Done. I've set the description and excerpt to the same thing because I don't see a need for them to be different things. https://github.com/minetest/blog/pull/154/commits/2011e28c952c6ff3e8a41db32d3d8ef5af4f0a77

Author: Maybe, but I would prefer not to fiddle with the theme for this PR.

> just three months after 5.9.1 in accordance with the new release schedule.

Reviewer: 5.9 is a minor release not a major release

```suggestion
just three months after 5.9 in accordance with the new release schedule.
```

## glTF Support

Until now, Luanti developers had to choose between two antiquated file formats for animated 3D models (`.b3d` and `.x`)
which have poor support in modern software and are difficult to work with.

Luanti now supports the modern [glTF file format](https://www.khronos.org/glTF/), which allows for seamless exports and
imports with modeling software such as Blender or Blockbench. It also allows developers to easily drop in freely-licensed
glTF assets from the internet.

[Support](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#gltf) is still a bit rough around the edges,
but feature parity with existing model file formats has already been achieved and better support is planned for the
future.

## gettext Translations

Luanti finally supports the standard [gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/) `.po` and `.mo` translation file
formats! These formats are much easier to manage via external tools such as Weblate, and also provide more options for
translators (such as correct plural forms). The custom `.tr` translation file format is still supported, but we highly

> recommend migrating to gettext (see [Translations API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#translations)).

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should highly recommend switching to PO file immediately since it would not work with older clients.

(That said, it would be nice to suggest using PO files for newer mods that use e.g. Weblate).

Author: Good point, noted the caveat: https://github.com/minetest/blog/pull/154/commits/9319e9a491ae2621873a363af184c35bb0d1f5cc

## Visual Effects

Even more eye candy has arrived for players to enjoy! Among the list of options are simple liquid reflections and waves,
translucent foliage, node specular highlights, softer clouds, and tinted shadows. This post's cover image features these
effects.

## Per-player Objects

Developers can now control which player(s) an object is sent and shown to with
[`object:set_observers()`](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#methods-10). For example, the
[Capture The Flag](https://content.luanti.org/packages/rubenwardy/capturetheflag/) server uses this for nametags which
can only be seen by teammates. It could also be used to implement in-world interfaces or displays that only the desired
player can see.

This implementation is entirely server-side, so only the server needs to be 5.10.0 to support this feature. Clients do
not need to upgrade to support this change.

## More Highlights

> * **IPC**: The new [IPC API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#ipc) allows async
>   environments to freely share data between all environments (async or not) via a key-value store, making async
>   environments much more powerful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **IPC**: The new [IPC API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#ipc) allows server modding Lua
  environments to freely share data between all environments (server, async, and mapgen) via a key-value store, making async and mapgen
  environments more powerful and easier to use.
```

> * **Bulk LBMs** let you run loading block modifiers on all the data in a mapblock at once with [the `bulk_action`
>   property](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#lbm-loadingblockmodifier-definition).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Bulk LBMs** let you run loading block modifiers on all the matching node positions in a mapblock at once with [the `bulk_action`
  property](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#lbm-loadingblockmodifier-definition).
```

recommend migrating to gettext (see [Translations API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#translations))
if you don't plan to support client versions older than 5.10.0.

## Visual Effects

Even more eye candy has arrived for players to enjoy! Among the list of options are simple liquid reflections and waves,
translucent foliage, node specular highlights, softer clouds, and tinted shadows. This post's cover image features these
effects.

## Per-player Objects

Developers can now control which player(s) an object is sent and shown to with
[`object:set_observers()`](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#methods-10). For example, the
[Capture The Flag](https://content.luanti.org/packages/rubenwardy/capturetheflag/) server uses this for nametags which
can only be seen by teammates. It could also be used to implement in-world interfaces or displays that only the desired
player can see.

This implementation is entirely server-side, so only the server needs to be 5.10.0 to support this feature. Clients do
not need to upgrade to support this change.

## More Highlights

> * **IPC**: The new [IPC API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#ipc) allows Luanti server

Reviewer: IPC makes my eyes glaze over, how about

```suggestion
* **Lua communication between threads**: The new [IPC API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#ipc) allows Luanti server
```

  Lua environments to freely share data between all environments (server, async, and mapgen) via a key-value store,
  making async and mapgen environments more powerful and easier to use.
* **Bulk LBMs** let you run loading block modifiers on all the matching node positions in a mapblock at once with
  [the `bulk_action` property](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#lbm-loadingblockmodifier-definition).
* [`get_player_control()`](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/5.10.0/doc/lua_api.md#player-only-no-op-for-other-objects)
  now exposes **joystick direction** (as X and Y axes). This may be especially useful for vehicles or arcade-inspired
  games.
* Mobile users will notice a grid menu in place of the button bar, as well as improved GUI scaling.
* Server & content list search now requires all keywords to match.
* Smooth scrolling can be toggled with a new setting.

## Conclusion

Check out [the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.9.1_.E2.86.92_5.10.0) for other minor features and

> bugfixes. Development has resumed on 5.11.0, with work being done on [improving object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bugfixes. Development has resumed on 5.11.0, with work being done on [improving the performance of moving objects]
```

> bugfixes. Development has resumed on 5.11.0, with work being done on [improving object
> structures](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues/14613), [custom touchscreen layouts](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/14933),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bugfixes. Development has resumed on 5.11.0, with work being done on [improving moving
object performance](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues/14613), [custom touchscreen layouts](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/14933),
```

Author: To be pedantic it's not just about moving objects, it's more general than that, e.g. if you have many static items around that could also benefit (items check for nearby items to merge with), though moving objects (especially things looking for prey or something) are one major application.
